GCMR MP Model with FP Tracking (#806)
idaholab/virtual_test_bed: doc/content/microreactors/gcmr/GCMR_Core_MP_FP.md

# Full Core GCMR Multiphysics Model with Fission Product Tracking

## Overview

> This model extends the [Full Core GCMR Multiphysics Model](/GCMR_Core_Multiphysics_models.md) by incorporating spatially-resolved tracking of the two dominant fission product poisons: Xe-135 and Sm-149. The mesh, involved applications, and three-level Griffin–BISON–SAM MultiApp coupling are identical to the baseline model and are not repeated here. Two targeted changes distinguish this model from the baseline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model extends the [Full Core GCMR Multiphysics Model](/GCMR_Core_Multiphysics_models.md) by incorporating spatially-resolved tracking of the two dominant fission product poisons: Xe-135 and Sm-149. The mesh, involved applications, and three-level Griffin–BISON–SAM MultiApp coupling are identical to the baseline model and their descriptions are not repeated here. Two targeted changes distinguish this model from the baseline:
```

\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial N_{Pm}}{\partial t} = \sum_{g=1}^{G} \gamma_{Pm,g}\,\Sigma_{f,g}\,\phi_g - \lambda_{Pm} N_{Pm},
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial N_{Sm}}{\partial t} = \lambda_{Pm} N_{Pm} - \sum_{g=1}^{G} \sigma_{Sm,g}\,\phi_g\,N_{Sm},
\end{equation}

with the subscripts Pm and Sm referring to $^{149}$Pm and $^{149}$Sm, respectively.

The aforementioned four isotopes (I-135, Xe-135, Pm-149, and Sm-149) are tracked as spatially-resolved fields within the fuel region and feed back into Griffin's neutronics solve at every time step through the cross-section library.

### Cross-Section Library

> The baseline multiphysics model uses `GCMR_XS_2grid_detailed.xml`, tabulated over fuel temperature ($T_{fuel}$) and hydrogen stoichiometry in the YH moderator. This model instead uses `GCMR_XS_Xe_TR.xml`, which additionally incorporates the fission product concentrations, enabling the neutronics solver to account for the self-shielding and spectral effects of Xe-135 and Sm-149 as they evolve in space and time.

Reviewer: mention the tabulation grid intervals?

### Griffin Input Configuration

The `PowerDensity` block activates fission product tracking through the `poison_tracking_chains` parameter:

!listing microreactors/gcmr/core/Multiphysics/steady_state_fp/MP_Griffin_ss_fp.i block=PowerDensity

The steady-state `UserObjects` block writes the converged neutron flux and poison density fields to files at the end of the run, providing physically consistent initial conditions for the transient:

!listing microreactors/gcmr/core/Multiphysics/steady_state_fp/MP_Griffin_ss_fp.i block=UserObjects

The transient `UserObjects` block reads those saved fields at initialization:

!listing microreactors/gcmr/core/Multiphysics/transient_fp/MP_Griffin_tr_fp.i block=UserObjects

## Steady-State with Equilibrium Fission Products

> The coupled steady-state simulation runs Picard iterations between Griffin (eigenvalue transport with CMFD acceleration) and the BISON–SAM sub-application until temperatures and fission product concentrations converge simultaneously. Temperature results are consistent with the baseline model (see [/GCMR_Core_Multiphysics_models.md]).

Reviewer: I am not sure it's doing Picard

i think it's running Richardson iterations?
or is setting GMRES as the inner solve making it do Picard?

Author: I am not sure. Inside Griffin it is Richardson. Let's use "fixed point iterations" instead.

At equilibrium, I-135 and Xe-135 concentration fields closely mirror the neutron flux distribution, peaking in the high-flux inner assemblies. Sm-149 reaches a nearly homogeneous equilibrium distribution because its long-lived Pm-149 precursor smooths spatial gradients before Sm-149 is produced.

## Control Rod Insertion Transient

### Scenario Description

> Starting from the equilibrium full-power state, the control rods are instantaneously repositioned at $t = 0$ from their fully withdrawn position (2.2 m) to nearly fully inserted (0.2 m), simulating a rapid power reduction representative of a load-following maneuver. The transient is simulated for 172,800 s (48 hours) to fully capture the Xe-135 and Sm-149 evolution to a new equilibrium at the reduced power level.

Reviewer: it s not representative of load follow imo it's much too fast

it's closer to a shutdown in the end

Author: Will change, the original plan was to run a load-following. But later it seems shutdown is more straight forward to run. Will fix

### Power Response

> [cr_fp_pow] shows the reactor power evolution following the control rod insertion. The large negative reactivity insertion from the rods causes an immediate power drop. The strongly negative temperature feedback quickly brings the reactor to a new self-sustaining state at the reduced power level without operator intervention.

Reviewer: from 20MW to 0.01MW ? and it's not even flat

Author: same.

!media media/gcmr/FCMP/cr_fp_evolve.png
      id=cr_fp_evolve
      style=display: block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:65%;
      caption=Evolution of I-135, Xe-135, Pm-149, and Sm-149 concentrations following the control rod insertion, normalized to their values at the first timestep.

Following the power reduction:

- +I-135+ exhibits the most rapid decline, dropping to roughly 35% of its initial value within 10 hours, consistent with its ~6.57-hour half-life and the abrupt loss of its fission-driven production source.
- +Xe-135+ decreases monotonically and more gradually than I-135, falling to approximately 78% of its initial value at 10 hours. The decline reflects the combined effects of reduced production from both fission and I-135 decay, partially offset by the lower neutron burnout rate in the post-insertion low-flux environment.
- +Pm-149+ remains essentially constant over the 10-hour window, as its long ~53-hour half-life sets a much slower adjustment timescale than the period shown.

> - +Sm-149+ decreases slightly to about 88% of its initial value, driven by the still-active (though reduced) neutron capture loss while its Pm-149 precursor production is largely unchanged on this timescale.

Reviewer: the power is so reduced that is surprising it would burn through 12% of the Sm149

Author: Confused Sm and Pm here, will fix.

# Full Core GCMR Multiphysics Model with Fission Product Tracking

## Overview

This model extends the [Full Core GCMR Multiphysics Model](/GCMR_Core_Multiphysics_models.md) by incorporating spatially-resolved tracking of the two dominant fission product poisons: Xe-135 and Sm-149. The mesh, involved applications, and three-level Griffin–BISON–SAM MultiApp coupling are identical to the baseline model and their descriptions are not repeated here. Two targeted changes distinguish this model from the baseline:

1. A cross-section library tabulated over fission product concentrations (`GCMR_XS_Xe_TR.xml`) replaces the baseline library.
2. Griffin's `PowerDensity` block activates spatially-resolved tracking of the I-135 $\rightarrow$ Xe-135 and Pm-149 $\rightarrow$ Sm-149 decay chains.

> The model is used to simulate a control rod insertion transient, demonstrating how fission product inventories evolve under a power reduction representative of a load-following maneuver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The model is used to simulate a shutdown transient by insertion of control rods, demonstrating how fission product inventories evolve after a shutdown.
```

## Fission Product Tracking Methodology

### Decay Chains

> Two fission product chains are currently supported by Griffin's poison tracking capability: $^{135}$Xe and $^{149}$Sm, which are covered by this model.

Reviewer: Does Griffin only support these two (what this seems to imply) or is the input set up to do these two

Author: Yes, only these two pairs are supported by the current Griffin

\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial N_{Pm}}{\partial t} = \sum_{g=1}^{G} \gamma_{Pm,g}\,\Sigma_{f,g}\,\phi_g - \lambda_{Pm} N_{Pm},
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial N_{Sm}}{\partial t} = \lambda_{Pm} N_{Pm} - \sum_{g=1}^{G} \sigma_{Sm,g}\,\phi_g\,N_{Sm},
\end{equation}

with the subscripts Pm and Sm referring to $^{149}$Pm and $^{149}$Sm, respectively.

The aforementioned four isotopes (I-135, Xe-135, Pm-149, and Sm-149) are tracked as spatially-resolved fields within the fuel region and feed back into Griffin's neutronics solve at every time step through the cross-section library.

### Cross-Section Library

> The baseline multiphysics model uses `GCMR_XS_2grid_detailed.xml`, tabulated over fuel temperature ($T_{fuel}$) and hydrogen stoichiometry in the YH moderator. This model instead uses `GCMR_XS_Xe_TR.xml`, which additionally incorporates the fission product concentrations, enabling the neutronics solver to account for the self-shielding and spectral effects of Xe-135 and Sm-149 as they evolve in space and time. For simplicity, `GCMR_XS_Xe_TR.xml` is only tabulated over fuel temperature ($T_{fuel}$) with three grid points (800K, 925K, and 1300K).

Reviewer: is it tabulated in hydrogen stochiometry and in Xe and Sm concentrations?

Or is it keeping track of micro groupXS for those and then there is no tabulation?

Author: For fission products, microXS is used

Notably, the low power density of the GCMR also leads to a low equilibrium Pm-149/Sm-149 ratio, so that Sm-149 change is negligible during the transient. In a system operating at a higher power density, the Pm-149/Sm-149 ratio would be higher, so the shutdown-induced drop in Pm-149 would lead to a more significant increase in Sm-149 during the transient.

### Spatial Fission Product Distributions

[cr_fp_profiles] presents the spatial distributions of all four isotopes at representative times during the transient.

!media media/gcmr/FCMP/cr_fp_profiles.png
      id=cr_fp_profiles
      style=display: block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:90%;
      caption=Spatial distributions of I-135, Xe-135, Pm-149, and Sm-149 at representative times during the control rod insertion transient. I-135, Xe-135, and Pm-149 closely follow the neutron flux distribution; Sm-149 shows a more homogeneous distribution.

> The spatial results confirm that I-135, Xe-135, and Pm-149 closely track the local neutron flux. Both I-135 and Pm-149 generation is directly tied to fission, so their concentrations are dependent on the local flux. Xe-135 is produced both from fission and from I-135 decay, and its removal is due to both decay and neutron absorption. At low flux conditions as in this case, as Xe-135 decay is the dominant removal mechanism, the equilibrium Xe-135 profile follows the flux profile. On the other hand, as Sm-149 is produced by Pm-149 decay and is removed only by neutron absorption, the flux term cancels out in its equilibrium concentration. So, the Sm-149 distribution is more homogeneous than the other three isotopes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The spatial results confirm that I-135, Xe-135, and Pm-149 closely track the local neutron flux. Both I-135 and Pm-149 generation is directly tied to fission, so their concentrations are dependent on the local flux in fissile regions. Xe-135 is produced both from fission and from I-135 decay, and its removal is due to both decay and neutron absorption. At low flux conditions as in this case, as Xe-135 decay is the dominant removal mechanism, the equilibrium Xe-135 profile follows the flux profile. On the other hand, as Sm-149 is produced by Pm-149 decay and is removed only by neutron absorption, the flux term cancels out in its equilibrium concentration. So, the Sm-149 distribution is more homogeneous than the other three isotopes.
```
